# ServiceWaterHeating - Rule 11-16

**Schema Version:** 0.0.37  
**Mandatory Rule:** True  
**Rule ID:** 11-16  

**Rule Description:** "Gas water heaters shall be modeled using natural gas as their fuel.  Exceptions: Where natural gas is not available for the proposed building site, as determined by the rating authority, gas water heaters shall be modeled using propane as their fuel."  

**Rule Assertion:** Options are PASS/FAIL/NOT_APPLICABLE/UNDETERMINED  
**Appendix G Section Reference:** Table G3.1 #11, baseline column, (h)  

**Evaluation Context:** Each SWH Equipment  
**Data Lookup:**   
**Function Call:**


**Applicability Checks:**
- look at each SHW Equipment: `for swh_eq in B_RMD.service_water_heating_equipment:`
  - if the fuel source is electricity, the rule is not applicable: `if shw_eq.heater_fuel_type == "ELECTRICITY": NOT_APPLICABLE`
  - otherwise, continue to rule logic: `CONTINUE TO RULE LOGIC`
  
    ## Rule Logic:
    - create variable heater_fuel_type: `heater_fuel_type = swh_eq.heater_fuel_type`
    - create a list that will be used to store the fuel types used in the proposed model swh equipment: `proposed_swh_eq_fuel_types = []`
    - look at each swh equipment in the proposed model and collect a list of fuel types: `for swh_eq_p in P_RMD.service_water_heating_equipment: if !(swh_eq_p.fuel_type.in? proposed_swh_eq_fuel_types): proposed_swh_eq_fuel_types.append(swh_eq_p.fuel_type)`

    **Rule Assertion:**  
    - CASE 1: if the fuel source is NATURAL_GAS, then PASS: `if heater_fuel_type == "NATURAL_GAS": PASS`
    - Case 2: Else if the fuel source is propane and the proposed fuel source is propane: `elif: heater_fuel_type == "PROPANE" && len(proposed_swh_eq_fuel_types) == 1 && proposed_swh_eq_fuel_types[0] == "PROPANE": UNDETERMINED and raise_message "Both baseline and proposed service water heating equipment is modeled as propane.  Verify that natural gas is not available for the proposed building site as determined by the rating authority."`
    - Case 3: Else if the fuel source is propane and any of the proposed fuel sources is NATURAL_GAS, then FAIL: `if fuel_source == "PROPANE" && "NATURAL_GAS".in? proposed_swh_eq_fuel_types: FAIL and raise_message "The fuel source for the baseline is propane, however the fuel source for the proposed is Natural Gas.  When natural gas is available on-site, natural gas is the required fuel source for the baseline model."'
    - Case 4: Else if the fuel source is propane, then UNDETERMINED: `if heater_fuel_type == "PROPANE": UNDETERMINED`
    - Case 3: All others fail: `else: FAIL`


**Notes:**

1. original language specified gas storage water heaters only.  The rule applies only to gas storage water heaters because "storage" type water heaters are the only valid baseline fossil-fuel water heaters.  However, the heater type is checked in another rule.  Can we just check fuel-type here?

**[Back](../_toc.md)**
